Essay on Prompt 1
         
It is often argued that for non-Western societies to come at an equal footing of social and  economic development, Western intervention was necessary , despite all the ills that it carried with it including but not limited to genocide, massacre of indigenous communities and a complete disregard of local customs and cultures. I argue that this was not the case as the argument that for such development to take place non-Western societies had to let go of their traditional practices, is contradicted by the presence of a high level of state capacity, governance and a welfare system ,in pre-colonial Asia. It goes to show that such societies were already performing at a high standard of governance and living despite western intervention, and colonialism was not the only way forward to achieve such development.
The Qing dynasty in China employed an exemplary form of a national welfare system where food security was a fundamental right guaranteed to all subjects. They maintained a unique national system of grain price stabilization , large scale storage of crop surpluses, and well managed granaries storing more than a million bushels of grain in each of twelve provinces, with  hydraulic infrastructures incomparable and far superior than its contemporaries. The most salient feature of food security in Qing dynasty was the invigilation of grain prices and supply trends by the emperor himself (David,2001,p.282). The Qing empires capacity to build  large scale hydraulic systems across multiple provinces is an indicator of not just technical prowess but also  long term state planning that goes against any notion of non-Western societies being static or incapable of developing and sustaining such development. In contrast to that no contemporary European society guaranteed subsistence as a human right to its peasantry ,while the Qing dynasty was honoring their social contract with the peasantry , contemporary Europeans were dying in the millions from famine and hunger related diseases following arctic winters and droughts in 1740-43 (Ibid.,p.281). This directly challenges the assumption that Europe represented a baseline against which the progress and development of non-European societies is to be measured. If European society was struggling at the very moment in time when Qing dynasty was functioning at it its most sophisticated and advanced form, it tells us about the kind of double standards through which we measure the progress of non-European societies. It appears as if Europe was not really a model to be emulated as they themselves were a society with various vulnerabilities and problems and in this specific case less developed than its Asian counterparts.
 Another example in precolonial Asia can be given of Mughals and Marathas ruling in Indian subcontinent. India under Mughals  functioned under a social contract where the “protection of the peasant” was an essential state obligation. In a similar fashion to their Chinese contemporaries, “the Mughal rulers Akbar, Shahjahan and Aurangzeb relied on a quartet of fundamental policies – embargos on food exports ,anti-speculative price regulation, tax relief and distribution of free food without a forced-labour counterpart”(Ibid.,p.286). It shows that during that era access to food and nutrition was not based on forceful work arrangements. In contrast to this generous arrangement, the colonial replacement to such a system was to make subsistence conditional on purchasing power  leading to catastrophic famines in Indian subcontinent, killing the likes of which had never been seen before. “In contrast to the rigidity and dogmatism of British land and revenue settlements 	, both the Moguls and	 Marathas flexibly tailored their rule to take account of the crucial ecological relationships and unpredictable climate fluctuations of the subcontinent’s drought prone regions” (Ibid.,p.287). It appears as if the supposedly “civilized” and “rational” British system of governance would not budge, while the so called “primitive” Mughal and Maratha systems were much more flexible and appeared to be more sophisticated and adaptive . This directly challenges the argument of colonial necessity as it counters the assumption that Western systems were a de facto and clear improvement over the non-Western governance structure which we just saw by counter examples was not really the case. This rigidity of British in governing Indian subcontinent transformed seasonal droughts into catastrophic famines. 

One of the primary objections to the sophistication of Mughal and Qing empires is that they were “World empires” that lacked the basic institutional architecture like freedom of thought and speech present in modern day nation states  .Critics characterize these societies as societies where power was not tied to a central legal authority, it instead was tied to ruling families who used the state machinery to siphon of wealth through taxes for personal gain. The modern nation state is characterized as “An impersonal and privileged legal or constitutional order with the capability of administering and controlling a given territory; that is, a distinct form of public power, separate from both ruler and ruled, and forming the supreme political authority within certain defined boundaries”  (Skinner, 1978 as cited in Held, p.73). When we compare the Qing and Mughal dynasties against this standard, critics classify their governance of the form in which political power is an extension of the ruler’s household. Under this model ,the state apparatus does not exist independently of the Family’s power but it is just an expression of personal power over a territory. Administrative officials are servants of the ruler and not workers in legally and formally defined offices. Revenue extraction is not a formalized process and the boundary between the rulers private holdings and public property is ill defined. Supporters of this objection claim that the personal involvement of Qing emperors in monitoring grain price reports is evidence that an impersonal administrative mechanism capable of functioning independently was absent which is the requirement and a cornerstone of modern day nation states.
One way in which I would like to respond to the counter argument presented above would be through a discussion on Stuart Halls analysis of the discourse of “the West and the Rest”. Hall draws on Foucault’s concept of discourse and describes discourse as a way of talking about or representing something. It produces knowledge that shapes perceptions and practice. It is part of the way in which power operates and it has consequences for those who use it and for whom it is used against. The West produced many different ways to talk about themselves and the others (Hall, 1992, p.318).
One of the ways in which the West did this was by painting non-Western societies as backward and stuck in stagnation and presented every action of the West as progressive. This discourse functioned as a “system of representation” generating a “regime of truth”  which was used to legitimize certain perspectives as objective and through which certain institutional forms like Western form of administration were defined as the de-facto form of governance and any other form (however successful and effective it be) was characterized as primitive. The discourse that Mughal and Qing empires were not “impersonal” acts precisely as the kind of representation mechanism presented above. It positioned the Western way of governance as the gold standard against which all forms of political governance mechanisms were measured and if any mechanism did not align with their means of governance , it was painted as primitive and stagnant. This characterization is problematic as it does not assess how effective non –Western governance structures were, it just claimed that just because these are non –Western governance mechanisms mean they are inferior to their western counterparts. The selection of such arbitrary governance structures as a universal standard was used as a tool to misrepresent highly functional Asian systems as deficient and relegated them to relics of the past.
In light of the above presented arguments, it is fair to say that the claim of colonial capitalism as a historical necessity stands on a weak base. Non –Western mechanisms were not structurally or objectively inferior to their Western counterparts, it was just the fact that the discourse produced painted it as such which has lead us to accept the “superior “ status of the West.
